Yeah, in Mexico, in central Mexico, in the Bahio.
I was fearful when these changes started to take place, which was much earlier there, back in about, let's see, oh, 1951, 2, 3, in that period, that this was likely to happen.
A lot of those...
Although Mexico went through the tremendous land reform after 1920, after the revolution when the haciendas and church lands were broken up, there were still family farms that were of fair size.
But the farmer, the owner, generally didn't farm them.
He leased the land out on a share basis.
But the result was he didn't have any machinery either, and he damn well didn't know anything about farming.
Yeah, so he needed the labor.
So he needed the labor.
And the labor needed the work.
And when we started to show these same tremendous yields and differences, then of course, this little, what do you call them, sharecropper,
The farmer would say, or the landowner would say, well, you have to provide the fertilizer.
These little guys, they were smarter than that.
And, no sir, this has to be on a percentage basis.
Or, I don't know how they had the guts to say it, or they would have been out, but it worked itself out rather well.
But what did they say?
No, you didn't tell me.
Oh, there was a struggle that went on in this early period.
And it turned out in most of those cases that the farmer... And the owner wanted the tenant to buy the fertilizer.
And the tenant said, no way, I won't do it.
And yet there were a few people who were making these adjustments.
And the way it turned out there in the end, most of those landowners...
provided two-thirds of the fertilizer and the tenant farmer a third.
But this changed over time, excuse me.
Where were we?
Okay, about the tenant.
and your experiences back in Mexico.
In Mexico, I never saw much disruption, and I think the reason was that most of the landowners, there were exceptions, where they had no house still, but most of them that salvaged part of their old haciendas had not mechanized, had not, I mean, they were,
a generation back of the land reform.
And as a result, they were not in a position to manage their own farms, at least in that early period.
And of course, there was another factor in Mexico also, because a lot of these small plots were heated farms, and that's where the state owns the land and they're given for use.
But I know on private properties where the owner
was not in position to go back to managing that himself.
Maybe his son would later, after he got himself straightened around, but that called for pretty good capital investment also in machinery or in bullocks.
There were still bullocks and mules in operation in Mexico at that time.
Now, let me say a word about Pakistan.
In India,
There weren't many of these large things.
There may have been a few camouflaged, like I say, under names of different members of their family.
But not, this was not why... Not very many large land holdings, yeah.
No.
In Pakistan there were.
But it seemed to me that I never saw much evidence of most of these tenants being pushed off in the early times.
And it may well again be because of the lack of management know-how.
The owners themselves were just so ignorant of the farm issues or had irons in other fires doing other jobs that they just didn't want to be bothered with it but at the same time they were happy to see the increased yield because it made more money for them.
And again there, I'm not sure, and I'm sure it varied a great deal from farm to farm, but how the arrangements were made for the cost of that input fertilizer, which was a big one.
The seed was no problem, you see, because you get one kilo and you plant a little plot in the next year for your three to five acre farm or hectare farm while you've got enough seed to plant it.
But the fertilizer is something else, and that's annual expenditure.
But it seemed to...
it seemed to me that suddenly there was fertilizer on all of that land, not the same level, but you could tell immediately that it was being fertilized.
Now, we had all kinds of adulterations, both in Mexico, and I'm sure it went on sometimes in those countries also.
In the early times in Mexico, this happened to be on corn, but I'm sure it probably happened on wheat also,
One of the good farmers that we worked with, he always got good response to fertilizer, both in his wheat and his corn.
But the neighbors, it was a miserable response.
And then the government caught this guy that was the distributor.
These were mixed fertilizers, nitrogen and phosphorus.
And the guy, instead of putting in phosphate fertilizer, he was grinding up old volcanic ash, red ash, mixing into it.
No phosphate at all.
But to the good farmer that knew best, he sold him a true nitrogen-phosphorus mix.
To the others, he just mixed up some red volcanic ash, ground it up.
and sold it.
So, dollar ration, all of these things come into the picture.
Everybody trying to scrape off and make a buck and setting the whole program back.
I think I told, did I tell you about the incident at Sonora that nearly derailed us there on fertilizer?
Oh yes, you did.
About these guys selling 218-18 formula when all we needed was nitrogen.
Sure.
And if I hadn't have blocked that one,
It would have been six, eight, ten years getting it on track.
Because it was with the big important people, after we'd finally won his confidence again on the varieties and now he was finally condescending to fertilizer and then he buys two carloads of this stuff.
That would have killed us and it was just a pure stroke of luck that I happened to go up there and
and my good friend Roberto Mauri says about six of us bought fertilizer and moreover he says we got this person that's selling it's got laboratory over here and we gave him room in our credit union the elevators where he's analyzing soil that was a farce
He wasn't analyzing for anything.
He'd bought some cheap fertilizer in the eastern U.S.
that was a good formula for out there where you had to have high phosphorus and potash and then some small levels of nitrogen to start it and then you'd add nitrogen as a side dressing.
And here he was selling it down there where it had no value at all.
I have another criticism, and that criticism deals with this whole issue of tenant farmers, and that is the issue of mechanization.
Some critics have said that once the landowners realized that they could make a lot more money than ever before off their land, they decided to mechanize, and that meant that either the tenant was kicked off or the laborers were kicked off, and eventually,
They were in the eviction of tenants.
What about that?
Especially in Pakistan.
I suspect that this went on, but at the same time, in the first place, you had to have foreign exchange to import that fertilizer.
In Pakistan, there were no tractor factories.
In India, there was this one that I was telling you about.
And so, you had to have hard currency to import this fertilizer.
And in the early times, this was mostly bullocks, power.
There were a few small tractors, but very few.
Obviously, these things are going to happen.
There's nobody that's going to stop this.
The drift from country to city has been
continuous one from shortly after the discovery of agriculture.
And to blame this on technology, that's unrealistic.
And to think that the technological change can control all of the sociological and political things, I think is a fair, is an unfair assumption.
Let me simply say that
There's another side to this picture.
Suddenly you'll have farms producing four or five times as much wheat.
Damn, and all of this is being done with primitive equipment, the thrashing.
There were people in the villages beating out some primitive thrashing machines, giving employment.
All of the people moving that massive amount of grain, they got doubled and tripled the former wages.
It wasn't long before, for example, in the book, The Villages, did you ever read that?
You need to read The Villages and the story, the chapter in there about the Punjabis in India.
This book, Villages, was written by Critchfield.
And it's well worth reading.
There's a whole chapter on what happened to the prices of labor in this Indian village.
And it's by who?
Critchfield.
C-R-I-T-C-H-F-I-E-L-D.
He's written a series of books that you should read, but this villages is a good summary of about his many years of experience in about 12 different cultures and societies ranging from Brazil, Mexico, to Indonesia, to Punjab in India, a bit on China.
He writes very well.
In this, he points out that this is the lowest caste, they just went into open rebellion.
They weren't going to take these same things that the upper caste Punjabis in India had been, the Sikhs had been putting down on them.
They just, there was more employment off farm.
They just walked off.
Or those that stayed,
Their salaries were increased a great deal.
One other modifying force was that soon after that, you see, OPEC came into being.
And so there was big demand for Pakistanis and Indians, laborers in the oil fields, in the Arab states.
And so with both of those forces operating, the price of labor went up.
With both the agricultural and the demand for labor in the oil fields.
But also, I think it's irrealistic to think that you aren't going to have some dislocations when you provoke change.
It has to be.
Yeah, and that's just what I wanted to get to.
the dislocation is inevitable whenever you change?
Whenever there's change there has to be, at least temporarily, some adjustments that you would wish could be made more humanely.
But I, frankly, of course I must say that when this was all going on at its best,
I was so damn busy moving around from one place to the other hoping that we could keep these balls up in the air in production and keep them going.
India, Pakistan, Turkey, and Argentina all at one time.
For all.
The rat race.
And so I never really had time to enjoy it.
Did you have time to, you said once in our interview that you were aware, you certainly as a scientist were also aware of being a social scientist.
Did you really ever have time to think about
the changes that you were bringing about, the changes in the social structure and the economy.
Yes, even from the early days of Mexico, I was well aware of these.
Well, I knew you were in Mexico, and we talked about that in Mexico, but what about when you were juggling four different countries?
I was well aware of it and I had one that was just the opposite, that I couldn't change and it hasn't been until very recently with the tremendous inflation that's forced them to change.
What's now?
Argentina.
Because the landed aristocracy controlled fiscal policies.
And they actually fought against the use of fertilizer.
And it was a curious thing.
Why?
What was the rationale for that?
Because many of those owned 5,000, 10,000, 20,000 hectares of land.
And their song was that the only way to maintain the fertility of the Pampa is that you have to have vast tracts and use cattle, use improved pastures with legumes.
alfalfa and grasses and cattle and then you plow some of this up periodically and plant cereals.
Now that was eyewash because most of their pastures were not improved.
The things that sometimes they called alfalfa and grass pastures
They had planted, sown down to alfalfa 15 or 16 years ago and if you look carefully you might find 16 alfalfa plants in Hecate and all the rest was grass that had been taken over.
So they were really not improved pastures in most cases.
But this song convinced many of the, and there weren't many scientists, the scientists
that chemical fertilizer, you couldn't maintain soil fertility, and this was the only way to do it, despite the fact on the family chakras, these are the hundred hectare, oh let's say fifty to a hundred to a hundred and fifty hectare farms, as we would think of them as family farms back here, generation back.
When we put our test on there, hell, it was some of the best responses to fertilizer I've ever seen.
And of course, we were trying to promote the use of fertilizer.
We could never get it done because of these people close to political leaders.
And they did everything wrong to block it.
The varieties came in about 15 years ago, they started coming in.
And a few farms, because there they built a little fertilizer plant that they never should have built.
I tried them to, because it came in in the middle sixties, right when the big centrifugal compressors were coming in, which cut the cost of production 30, 40% compared to the old reciprocal compressors.
And I was aware of this because they were being put in, in India at that same time.
And I tried to, and the,
American Foreign Power, which had been nationalized, American Company, Electric Power, in Argentina.
And in the agreement, the capital was to be reinvested in some Argentine industry.
And so, they came up to see me a couple of times in Marco Juarez.
And I was working with these early stages of these dwarf wheats then, but still on the station, not out on farms.
And they asked me about these fertilizer plants, and we were in contact several times, and finally when they were making the final decision, must have been in about 66 or 67.
I was on home leave in Iowa, and how they found me is beyond me, but one Saturday I got a call to come to New York, or would I come?
I said yes, and they said we're going to make a decision.
on the size of this fertilizer plant.
This was to have been a joint venture, Argentine capital and this American foreign power.
And so I went and I tried to convince them not to build obsolescence into that plant, to build a thousand ton a day plant with modern technology and quit talking about that 200 ton a day, 250, because of the difference in cost.
And I couldn't convince them.
They said, we won't be able to sell it.
And I said, hell, you can't.
I'd heard that song here in Mexico also.
And finally I said, look, let me bring, I've forgotten his name now.
About what year was this?
Probably sixty, six or seven.
Okay, I just want to get into this.
Okay.
I said, let me bring the head engineer over from chemical engineering who was a contractor for ESO fertilizer plant in Pakistan that I had gotten to know.
So I called him that afternoon.
I said, will you come to lunch?
We're talking about this.
He says, if you're involved, yes.
So he said, come by my office and I did and we walked over and he said,
I don't want a lot of detail.
I don't want to be confused.
He's a chemical engineer.
He says, how much fertilizer is used at the present time in Argentina?
I said, virtually none.
What kind of responses do you get?
I said, the only data that we have is on wheat, but on the family-sized farm, which is where the social problems are, we get tremendous responses.
And I said, but you will be fighting against the big landowner because he says you don't need fertilizer.
And I explained why.
And I said, moreover, this has to be a big plant because of the efficiency, the low production cost, as he had told me or his company had.
previously in Pakistan but I said hell if they can't use it all in the beginning there's Brazil right next door a short haul sell it to Brazil because Brazil is trying bringing its fertilizer from Trinidad and from Colombia much farther transport he says makes sense to me so we went in he said I don't want to know any more than that
Well, we started in and they were giving him the song and dance.
They had to build a small one.
He was a very explosive guy.
By the time we got to the desert, this exchange had been going on with these officials, both Argentinians and this American foreign power.
And finally he stood up and threw down his napkin.
he said i don't want to be involved in building obsolescence into any fertilizer industry says you've made a decision to build obsolescence into the first plant in your country and i don't want any part of it if you want to do that last friday i went down to baton rouge
and we turned on the valves on the 1,000 ton a day plant and at the same time we turned off the valves on an obsolete 200 ton a day plant.
Go down and buy that for scrap iron and he walked out.
Be damned if they didn't do it.
And before... 200.
Before it started to produce, two years later,
They put a protective tariff on.
That's the equivalent of $40 a ton of urea, $80 a ton for N. And that raised that, and then ad valorem tax on fertilizer imports, on top of that, added about $100.
$20 a ton to every ton of nitrogen imported.
The result is that we could never get it off the ground.
Some people would bring in small amounts, but a disaster.
And then on top of that, the Argentine government taxed 25% on the export of grain.
And so the farmer would have to sell, for them to sell, the Argentine government's the only exporter.
So that Peron left them that heritage.
And that meant that they would have to set the domestic price, $25 a ton less, approximately, than the international market.
And that's what their farmers got.
And that prevailed for 20 years, and until last year when the economic, the inflation was so great, and when Alfoncine came in, the first elected president for a long time,
Lucio Recca, who was a friend of mine, who was a PhD in economics under Schulz at Chicago, came in and he cut that protective tariff in half and bought up, no, 75 percent.
and bought up all of the production of this plant and then he makes the two prices and we got this thing on track this last year.
By far the largest yields that we've ever had.
But more important, the thing that paved the way, even that stopped the pushing and pulling on the big landed people came about through the wheat varieties.
When these little early maturing wheat varieties that we introduced in the cooperative Mexican-Argentine breeding program where we used to shuttle them back and forth, they came on stream, and they were higher yielding.
They responded well to fertilizer, and there were a few people who bought little fertilizer, even though it was priced completely out of the market.
But creative little farmers,
they saw what was going on up in Brazil on soybeans.
So they went up and got some soybeans and brought them back.
And with the new varieties that matured five or six weeks earlier than the old wheat varieties, they plant soybeans and they get a double crop of wheat and soybeans.
The result is that now Argentina produces six million tons of soybeans.
Then these big landowners couldn't sit there on their cattle with a couple of cowboys because the income of wheat
And soybeans on the land was more than they were ever going to make from cattle.
Sure.
And so that doesn't mean that they sold off all their cattle, but the best land was put into double crop, wheat, soybeans, and then generally corn, and then back to wheat with fertilizer.
It took us all of these years to get that finally going in the right direction.
You've got to work on all of those fronts.
But you see, many of the best critics are in the social science, economics.
They don't even know what the hell it's like out on the firing line because they've never been integrators.
They stand behind their own tree with great comfort.
And it's not just true of the economists.
That's the reason our corn program never got off first base in Mexico and when it's needed so badly now in Africa.
We've had excellent corn breeders, excellent entomologists on corn.
Some people who've done respectable work on fertilizer of corn.
But each one stands behind that own tree.
Nobody looks at the forest.
Nobody knows or nobody wanted to go out of their own specialty to put all of these pieces together.
to produce the package that you then have to try on dozens and then hundreds of farms.
And then when you've got a pretty good package to get the attention of those planners, economic planners and the political leaders, very often the economic planners, he can't see except his own tree either.
And he's the most difficult person to convince in India.
They were awful.
And in Pakistan, they were mostly the Harvard economists who were there on contract.
We could never get them to come into the field to look at our fertilizer test.
Yet they were the people who were programming how much fertilizer Pakistan should have 10 years ahead.
And they were projecting that same flat curve.
And any person who ever saw one of those fertilizer tests would know that that data that they were projecting was worthless.
Arzvek, this one economist that Hansen had taken out of this group and put in the minister's office, he used to go out with us.
In the beginning, he couldn't tell the difference between the yield of one ton and three tons.
But after he went out with Narvaez and I for a few dozen times, hell,
picked this up in a hurry, and he was the one voice in the wilderness that helped us with the yield.
I have another, we have to sum it up pretty soon, but I've got another criticism that I'm sure that you're used to, and that's the criticism that's been leveled against you and the Green Revolution concerning pesticides and environmentalists.
Yes.
That's a good one.
Because in wheat, we virtually use very little chemical.
Very rarely do we ever, did we ever in Mexico, once in a while there would be an English grain aphid outbreak, which you take care of with one spray.
In India and Pakistan, the insects are a minor problem on wheat.
And so this was never an issue.
Most of the weed control, it's only now that herbicides are beginning to come in in places like Mexico in the early times.
It was handled by crop rotations, by pre-irrigating to get germination.
And to a large extent, that's still the case in India and Pakistan.
There's very little chemicals used.
My point was that I tried to tell these
neo-ecologists, I called them.
I was trained neo-ecologists.
Why were you calling them?
Because they suddenly discovered all about ecology.
Hell, I was trained to forest ecologists before they knew what the word was.
And they thought that I was just stupid about these things.
And this was a personal insult to me.
The only tools we had to... Many of them.
Many of
Organizations too?
Yeah, and Ehrlich and the whole... Paul Ehrlich?
Yeah, and organizations, the Audubon Society and up at Wisconsin, what the devil was, Hickey, Dr. Hickey, who concocted the soft eggshell hypothesis that led to the demise of DDT.
The issue there, when I testified
the USDA when this was all in turmoil in 70, 71.
Over DDT?
Yeah.
I said here in the US you don't have vector-borne diseases of importance.
If you want to ban DDT it's not important because it's you've got many other insecticides besides it's the poor man's insecticide.
It's not a money man.
This is the fault of the chemical industry, too.
They didn't defend it.
There was a place to defend it.
But I said, when you ban it, and then you begin to exert pressure on the developing nations in the semi-tropics and tropics to ban DDT because they are polluting the environment, then I will object because I know what will happen to malaria.
And in the January issue,
of the economist of this year, Dr. Swamalinga Swami, who is the head of the Indian Council of Medical Research, a very top-notch medical officer, said this.
The biggest mistake that we ever made in India was to ban DDT.
We had brought malaria down to 250,000 cases.
We were curing most of those.
There had been no deaths for three years.
We were, with medication, curing most of them, reducing it.
We had a good chance of eradicating it.
We banned EDT by listening to what was going on in the U.S.
and Sweden, and we went back to seven and a half million cases, and we will probably never be able to get it under control again.
And I anticipated that.
I had seen what had happened.
I'd been in those damn situations.
Fortunately, I'd never gotten malaria, but I'd been all around.
And you see the effluency.
A good or bad environment is a sort of a subjective thing.
It's a different thing for
someone who's got a high standard of living, who's concerned about the beauties of Mother Nature, and I am too, because I grew up in that, and wants to enjoy the outdoors over weekend and during their month vacation.
We all like it, or most of us.
But he has a different set of values than
Some poor kid down in the slums, a black or a white, doesn't make any difference, that will never have a chance to see those things.
Or then a dishwasher in some restaurant in Minneapolis, or a worker in many of the menial tasks that have to be performed.
So we have to recognize this.
And when the U.S., an affluent society, tries to impose its will by fear about what's going to happen to the environment on other third world nations, I take great offense at this.
I think it's inhumane.
It's even immoral as far as I'm concerned.
Who are they to make those decisions?
We're all in this canoe together, and some of them in the back part of that canoe are in pretty bad shape.
This has to do with organizations that parrot this sort of thing, as well as individuals.
Why couldn't they use other types of pesticides to kill off the mosquitoes from malaria?
Why couldn't they use other types of American products or develop their own products?
Because it was the safest of the bunch and the lowest cost and it was never sprayed for malaria.
It was painted on the insides of the huts and shacks where the mosquitoes during the heat of the day come in and hide and kill.
And I was never convinced of the soft eggshell hypothesis.
And what's now?
This was the one that Professor Hickey at the University of Wisconsin cooked up, which led to the banning of DDT more than any other single factor in the U.S.
The hypothesis was that
DDT got into the food chain.
It upset the calcium metabolism.
The result was soft eggshells, thin eggshells.
In the process of incubation the eggs would break and so the numbers of chicks would be of whatever species would be much less.
Lots of thin eggshells.
I've seen them all
over when calcium metabolism is wrong from the time I was a little boy.
When we didn't have enough, we used to use oyster shells in drying them up.
There are other things that can upset.
And the only experimental evidence that I ever accepted was some that was done by Bidman, who was a good researcher at Beltsville, USDA, where he used Japanese quail.
and he had high levels of DDT in the ration on the birds.
There were two levels, and then the check without any DDT in the ration.
The levels were pretty high.
In his summary, he says, with the higher dosage, there was a tendency
for more soft-shelled eggs.
It was not statistically significant, but definitely indicated a trend.
But he said the curious thing was that most of these soft-shelled eggs came from two hens.
If that were so, it meant that there was genetic variation that would have taken care of that even at that level, which was probably far too high.
And I used to argue with the current
head of the Audubon Society, Russ Peterson, about this issue time and again, and about, must have been about ten years ago, eight or ten years ago, I invited him down to Obregón, Cidad de Obregón, to show them how we had to have chemicals, both fertilizer and herbicides and
pesticides, and we had to use them properly.
It's no different in medicine.
If you have an infection, you go to your family doctor and he diagnoses what's wrong with you and he gives you a prescription, you go to the pharmacy and you have it filled, and if you take that properly as erected, it'll probably alleviate you or cure you.
And if you take it improperly, it may kill you.
And that's the way it is with agricultural chemicals.
And I say, if we're going to continue to feed these people,
We have to have them.
We have to use them properly.
Now this whole issue has got, well, I started to say that I got Russ down there.
I showed him this and I think he was pretty well convinced.
that we weren't abusive and misuse of these things and I went out bird watching with him on Sunday morning and he cried he had a checklist as long as your arm and very happy and took him up along the Gulf of California in the afternoon to look at shorebirds and there were brown pelicans.
The brown pelican was used as a bird that was disappearing from the coast of California as the clincher to put the band on DDT.
What do you say about that?
What was his response?
We got up along, we stopped, and we'd see 20, 30 brown pelicans fattened, preening themselves.
About a half an hour before sunset, we drove out on the point up at San Carlos Bay, just above Guaymas, where they filmed Old Catch-22 with those burned-out shacks on the end of this runway.
And as we drove up, God, there was a shoal of fish in close to the shore.
And just off the point, there's three islands separated from the mainland by about a quarter of a mile and from each other another half mile between.
And I've never seen a sight like that before or since.
But they showed the fish in there.
Oh, God, they were just dive bombing these damn things.
Numbers like I have never seen.
And Russ was looking at them and Bente, his assistant, they were head of the Council for Environmental Quality in the White House at that time, looking at them.
I said, Russ, how many are there?
He didn't answer me, and I repeated it, and no answer.
He's still looking, and I finally, I took him by the elbow, and I said, Russ, damn it, how many are there?
He said, Norm, I don't know.
I've never seen anything like this.
Might be 3,000, might be 5,000.
I said, now, Russ, do you understand why the hell you and I don't agree on this?
This is cotton country.
We still use DDT, BHC, and...
the other chlorinated hydrocarbons and use them properly on cotton.
Explain this.
Is the explanation that there was something wrong with the hypotheses and the dosages that were used to prove, and wasn't very conclusive proof, the soft eggshell hypothesis?
Or is this race of brown pelican, the Mexican race, so damn stupid it doesn't know that it's supposed to be laying soft-shelled eggs and becoming extinct?
Well, we laughed.
But this is why there's a lot of very poor science in this emotional environmentalist movement.
For example, let me clarify this this way.
I have undergone tremendous reverse cultural shock in the last year since I've been back after living 40 years abroad.
One gets the impression from television and the press and
radio, that the American people are being poisoned out of existence.
And there's no evidence.
Everything, the doom and gloom.
And all of the evidence is that life expectancy continues to increase.
At the turn of the century, 1900, life expectancy for both halves of the species was 47 years.
and there was only a spread of about a year between male and female.
In 83, the last data that I have available, life expectancy was average of 74, women 78, and men just about 71, and it continues to increase.
But we are so damn affluent in living the good life
that there are those who forget that all things that are born into this world are sooner or later going to die, and that there's a biologic time clock built into every species, and the human species is no exception.
The longest, the oldest live person, where there's well documented birth certificate,
lived to about 113 years, a Japanese, and there's a few others that have been documented at 110, but we're getting up close to where we are dying not just from cancer,
We have removed many of the diseases that used to take a heavy toll in childhood and in youth and in early life.
And so we are seeing a different group of diseases, among which is cancer of various kinds.
The one that takes the greatest toll, of course, is lung cancer, which you can see the strong correlation between cigarettes.
There's no doubt about this.
We talk about pollution of chemicals in our food coming from pesticides, and some of them have been built into the scare of cancer, carcinogenic.
Dr. Ames at the University of California at Berkeley, outstanding chemist, biochemist, began, he says, he was convinced when he began his work, these rapid screening tests,
He used a simple device to screen compounds.
He had a culture medium missing one essential amino acid for the test organism that he grew.
And so suspicious chemicals he would add to this medium.
That meant if they mutated so that that fungus grew, this
compound was mutagenic, and then he had established correlations between mutagenicity and carcinogenicity.
And he was able to ferret out a couple of industrial chemicals that actually worked.
But in a paper published about a year and a half ago, a summary of these 10 years of work, he said, then I began analyzing many of the foods that we've been eating since the day of Adam and Eve, that we eat every day.
And they're full of these compounds that are either toxic, carcinogenic, teratogenic, which will produce adverse effects on embryos.
But they're at such low levels that they apparently cause no injury.
We didn't even know they were there until recently, but now our chemical analysis are such that we can...
analyzed for a fraction of a part per billion.
So they're all around about us.
So it's a question of degree?
It's a question, yes.
And it's a question of interpretation.
And it's a question of interpretation if we control, and all of the cancer incidents, except for tobacco, have been going down.
With few exceptions.
There are differences between different countries in the incidence of different kinds of cancer, but the one that's going up and continues to go up, and it's going up now for women, and maybe those eight years of difference in longevity in women will be reduced if women smoke more cigarettes.